one of the things that we established
when we were looking at the
developmental course of maturation so
tell me what you think about this so it
seems to me that a lot of what we see as
narcissism is actually something like
prolonged prolonged immaturity now it's
a little more complicated than that so
the little kids that we studied and and
this is true of those who've studied
little kids in general so there's about
5% of males at the age of
two who hit kick bite and steal when you
put them with other
two-year-olds and they're almost all
male and there's only one in 20 and so
you could say most two-year-olds aren't
Psychopathic
narcissists by by temperament so these
are probably the boys who are
disagreeable extroverts by temperament
right and so they're competitive they're
pushy and they're as when they're very
young they're impulsive now most of them
are socialized by the age of four now
our studies of long-term criminality
indicated that it was the minority of
that 5% who weren't socialized by the
age of four that became the long-term
predatory criminals and it was very
difficult to do anything about that
after the age of four but that's also
made me think more recently that what
we're seeing as that narcissistic
predatory parasitism is probably
something like a fail
of maturation it's like rather than
being a pathology in and of itself it's
just the maintenance of self-centered
immaturity far beyond its expiry date
and so I'm wondering what what you think
of a formulation like that I like that
idea and that there is a immaturity to
narcissism um I just to take it in a
little bit of a Freudian Direction it
seems you can think you know if you
think about it in terms of of sort of
developmental model the the narcissism
is like being stuck in the phallic stage
a little bit rather than being stuck in
say the oral stage anal stage so I don't
think it's just there can be different
types of being
immature I think that right right right
dependent for example yeah it's not
you're not a dependent not like I just
need someone to take care of me I'm 50
years old it's more you get stuck in
this like I should say adolescent this
childish phallic masculine I'm going to
do this I'm going to get this and and
you get stuck in that and that model you
know you can use it as an adult but it's
kind of like a you're a little bit of a
cartoon and so that's something I see
that's it's it's like you're a cartoon
child acting like an adult like I'm a
big deal like the guys that try to be
Alpha and I'm like yeah dude um so yeah
I do see I do Cal down there yeah calm
down come on um so I do see that for
sure but I I do think it's a it's sort
of One path in development that that you
don't develop it's not all the
paths America's Health Care system is
lacking in any real care insurance
companies regularly deny Progressive
treatment options primary care
physicians refuse to order comprehensive
lab work and the standards of care lag
years behind the leading research that's
where mer health comes in mer Health
represents a paradigm shift in how we
approach medicine the Premier Health
optimization platform meric Health
empowers you to maximize your longevity
and performance with the confidence that
comes from having experts in your back
pocket they offer Cutting Edge
diagnostic Labs concierge Health
coaching and expert clinical oversight
they help you achieve your health and
fitness goals by leveraging datadriven
lifestyle and nutrition recommendations
along with supplement and prescription
treatment options if you're listening to
this show then you're probably a
proponent of taking your health into
your own hands that's why we've teamed
up with mer Health to offer a turnkey
optimization package designed for those
who want to maximize their performance
and Longevity with the most elaborate
testing on the market you'll receive
extensive lab work thorough lab reports
video calls with Merck's Health experts
and expedited onboarding go to mer
health.com Peterson and use code
Peterson to get the same panel and
medical oversight I get and save 10 at
checkout that's mer health.com Peterson
and use code Peterson
checkout yeah yeah well I think that's a
good distinction because it it it it it
shines a light on another social olical
or psychological phenomena so one of the
things that we see um is the rise to a
certain type of stardom of people like
Andrew
Tate and the Andrew Tate phenomenon has
really interested me because I have some
sympathy for him now it's limited but
it's limited in the way that you just
described so you could imagine that the
worst form of immaturity the most
counterproductive form of immaturity
would be something like well the
Freudian oral stage if we reformulated
that in more modern terminology that
would be something like prolonged
infantile immaturity so you're basically
stuck as a dependent right and so you
have no Lo all your Locust of control is
external all you do is whine to get
people to deliver to you what you want
now that's perfectly acceptable if
you're six months old although you could
even use smiling at that point and as an
invitation but but then you might
imagine that if you are stuck at that
dependent stage and you have a impulse
for M maturation if someone who was more
narcissistic and aggressive came along
they would actually look attractive to
you because first of all it would be
better to be it's better to be a
narcissistic extrovert than it is to be
a dependent infant that doesn't mean
it's good right but it it does mean that
it's better yeah well and you could
think about that from an evolutionary
biological perspective too because it's
definitely the case that manipulative
Psychopaths can be successful in
finding sexual partners whereas
infantile dependent men they're just not
going anywhere on that side of things
because they can't like no women
virtually no women are attracted to
infantile dependent men some women are
attracted to narc nistic blo Hearts
right so yeah is that in keeping with
your understanding of the developmental
progression yeah I mean I think that I
think it makes sense and I like how
you're saying that like look dude it's
better to be narcissistic and full of
yourself if you're a guy than just be a
dependent loser but that isn't the
highest stage of male development isn't
being a peacock you know you know it's
it's it's helping it's being a provider
it's being do it's doing more than that
it's leading the family it's leading
people so um I but again it is better to
be narcissistic than just dependent so
yeah it makes sense oh you mentioned
Andrew Tate and I it's not I'm kind of
old for this but I see a lot of younger
guys that are attracted to this more
sort of Alpha and quotes personality
model and I understand it too because
they're not getting a lot of really good
male role models out there so they see
one that looks sort of cartoonish and
seems functional and seems to have some
agency and seems to be navigating life
effectively in a way that would be
appealing to a 15-year-old guy and so I
understand it I just wish we had better
role models you know but I understand it
might also be well it might also be that
there is a a time at which that's
actually developmentally appropriate so
you know one one of the things we found
in our in our analysis of the
development of Psychopathology so
imagine with uh teenagers okay imagine
there's two patterns of rule three
patterns of of living with the rules say
when you're 13 to 15 and you're a male
now it also applies to females but less
so because they're not as aggressive but
so imagine that you're a 13 to 15 year
old male who never breaks a rule
ever okay now imagine you're a 13 to 15
year old and you break a rule all the
time and then imagine that you're
somewhere in the middle okay so that's
the whole distribution well the the
males who never break a rule they are at
higher risk for dependent personality
disorder for depression and anxiety
later in life now the ones on the other
end of the spectrum are much more at
risk for Lifetime criminality let's say
and substance abuse violence and all
that so there's pathology associated
with both extremes with regards to rules
now the kids in the middle they are
going to experiment and so now you could
imagine that if you're a kid who comes
from a good home and you're pretty rule
oriented there might well be a time
between the ages of 13 and 15 or 16
something like that where it's actually
appropriate for you to admire the rule
Breakers to some degree because that's
one of the things that pops you out of
that childhood dependence on your
parents right but hopefully you would
supersede that as you mature and that is
the pattern for most men right I mean
criminality drops off like mad around 25
and so does substance abuse something
like that and that's often when men who
are like men women like men four to five
years older and so it makes sense that
it's about 25 or so that Men start to
get their act together and that's when
they take that step beyond the more
narcissistic and showy aspects of
masculinity and take on these roles that
are oriented towards a longer time span
and a broader social Horizon what you're
making me think of is the classic You
Know Jack blocks work on on you know
drug use in the in Berkeley back in the
70s it was the people who didn't use any
and use too much that got into trouble
and then there's this go golden mean in
the middle and you see that golden mean
in a lot of things where you know you
you want to have a little Edge but not
too much Edge you want you don't want to
be perfectly moral but you don't want to
be immoral there's always that little
bit of edge and you're right
developmentally I think it's appropriate
for young guys to kind of go to that
little darker side for a while maybe
[Music]